Project Description: The goal of this project is to use vocal data from patients with and without Parkinson's Disease (PD) to classify whether a person has or does not have PD with above an 80% accuracy.

The current way that PD is diagnosed is through a neurologist. The neurologist will make the decision that a person has PD based on their medical history and symptoms. The neurologist may also try to rule out other diseases through an MRI, blood test, and/or DaTscan. They also may try to give them a PD medication and if it helps, it will help to convince that they have PD. No specific test is available which can lead to a wrong diagnosis. By being able to diagnose PD through other methods such as a person’s vocals, the neurologist will be more accurately able to diagnose PD. As PD progresses, the muscle of the vocal cord becomes thinner and less taught and changes the person’s voice as well as their intelligibility which is a change that could hopefully be noticed in the early stages of PD to help with diagnosis.

This model would be important to both the people trying to get diagnosed as well as the doctors trying to diagnose them. This diagnosis provides the doctor with more certainty a patient has PD which can ensure they can get treated properly. If a doctor is not sure enough, they may say its something else and mistreat you allowing the disease to progress enough that delaying progression isn’t possible. This method will only be able to function as a tool like any of the other tools mentioned above to help convince a neurologist that a patient does or doesn’t have PD. Since it would be combined with other tools, it wouldn’t have for sure effect a doctors decision to diagnose a patient, so it would be unlikely to be able to be misused and false positives or false negatives wouldn’t have a definite affect. Also, when a doctor diagnoses PD, they tell their patients a percentage of uncertainty since there is no definite way to diagnose, so the uncertainty of the algorithm would be included in the diagnosis.

The full proposal can be found in the Project Description file with the latest Project Deliverable number.

To see what occured for deliverable 1 and 2, check the project proposals for each deliverable. Deliverable 3 is creating the first draft for the project paper. Deliverable 4 and 5 are the final paper. To see the exact dates for each part and when it was submitted, check the Test Branch.

The Code and How to Navigate it:

There are a total of 4 code files contained within the GitHub repo. Parkinsons.py contains the original efforts to find the best algorithm as well as some of the code used to create the graphs within this paper. It can be run to display the accuracies for each algorithm with the original data and can be modified slightly to be run on other datasets as well as a basic algorithm finding tool. PD_Highest_Accuracy.py contains the untuned RF and KNN algorithms and their accuracies. PD_Final_Program.py showcases how the tuning process occurred. Both can be simply ran to see the results. The last program is most similar to what a tool used by neurologists might be and is named PD_Classification_Pipeline.py. In it there is the normal dataset as well as a spot at the bottom of the code with a variable called filename, more specifically it is in the 56th line of code. This variable can be replaced by a csv containing data from patients in a similar format to the original data, but without the status column containing whether a patient does or doesn’t have PD. The specific columns required can be found at the 63rd line of code containing the column names. Once this filename variable is replaced with the file name in quotations (such as the following: “patients.csv”), the program can be run and will output the classifications for the patients in the csv that was added in as well as the accuracy of the algorithm in the console.
